We're out on April 3rd. We're out on Chick Lane. And
the sky is overcast. Looks like it might be rainy.
And I'm about to have the great joy and honor of
interviewing Dr. Frank Hubert, former dean and
chancellor, and for me, seventh grade band
director and twelfth grade principal. Dr.
Hubert, now check your, say a sentence or so and
let's see if yours are working. I'll take this
moment to tell you that you need to go out to your van
and turn your lights off.
Let's begin by your giving a biographical summary
of your growing up and experience before coming to
A&M in 1959. This would introduce any reader of
this material later to your background. All
right.
Public education in Cameron and in Austin.
Graduated from Austin High School in 1932.
I entered the University of Texas,
had a checkerboard career there, two years of
pre-medicine, and then after spending a summer in
Galveston living in a med fraternity house, I
learned that medicine was not my cup of tea. So back
to the university, changed curricula, graduated
in 38 with a degree in government at
the close of that period my undergraduate period i
was in the longhorn band and when george hurt
colonel george hurt came to the university to
direct the band I think in 1936. He
asked me to be the student assistant director and I
was that. And. I had honked my way through the
University on a tenor saxophone.
For that six year period. And that was my musical
background, essentially.
Hurt made me the student assistant, and I enjoyed
that role very much.
Letcher Stark, a philanthropist from Orange,
Texas,
and at that time chairman of the Board of Regents of
the University of Texas,
asked Hurt to come down to Orange one summer and
to provide a summer training program for his two
musical organizations, a girls drum and bugle
corps, the Bengal Guards, and a boys band.
The band was in a transition period and searching
for a new director. Hurt recommended me. I went
down for an interview, was employed by Mr. Stark,
although I was a full-time member of the faculty.
My salary came from Lutch Stark Boys
Incorporated, a charitable corporation.
Began my teaching career there.
six years into the spring of 44, and I went into WWII
late in the war.
It got to the point where most of my friends in
Orange, Mary Julia and I, many couples, the guys
were being drafted and there were some with one and
two children.
I wasn't
drafted. I
told Mr. Stark, I can't wait here while all of these
guys are going, so I'm going to ask for voluntary
induction. he said well i wish you'd wait till the
end of the school year the reason is that governor
coke stevenson is going to make our commencement
address i said mr stark my burning ambition is that
i've got to go to the service he said well i'll
understand that so i did a couple of years in the
military during which time I started
correspondence courses on a master's degree at
the University of Texas in school
administration. After the war, went back with my
GI Bill, one year at UT, finished my master's, and
let's see, that year was 46.
J.W. Edgar at that time was superintendent of
schools in Orange. And I had had a course the summer
of 46 in which Dr. Edgar was enrolled. He was
working on his doctorate at that time.
It was a course in elementary education. At the end
of the summer, he invited me to come to Orange This
is now 46. As an elementary principle of Tilly
School in Riverside Edition. That's
T-I-L-L-E-Y. Yes. And I accepted.
Mary Julia and I and Hank.
At that time, our... three, oh, five-year-old.
Hank was born in 41, and this is 46. Our
five-year-old
hopped in the car and headed out for Orange. During
our ride to Orange,
T.P. Baker, who was then principal of the high
school, Accepted a job in Austin as principal of
the Austin High School.
And at that time, Doctor Edgar asked.
Doctor Edgar, was he still Superintendent then?
Or was it Chandler? Edgar Edgar was
Superintendent then Edgar asked. WT Barrett,
Edgar asked WT Barrett, who had been assistant
principal, to take the principal's job. Barrett,
with whom I had lived in a rooming and boarding
house in Orange during my band director years and
before my marriage in 1940, Barrett asked Doctor
Edgar if he could have me as an assistant
principal. Edgar said yes, so I never did get to.
Operate as an elementary principle. I moved into
the high school as an assistant principal. One
year, Barrett went to Odessa. I moved into the
principal's office. Just at the time when Edgar
was moving to Austin. As a Superintendent and the
new Superintendent, CEO Chandler. told me,
Frank, we can't afford an assistant principal
again. You're going to have to be the principal and
the assistant principal. I agreed, of course. And
that year was probably the most heavily loaded
work year I've ever had. But nonetheless, at the
end of 48,
had an offer from the University of Texas to accept
a research fellowship in the College of
Education, working with J.G. Umstadt,
a specialist in secondary education, and with
Henry Otto, a nationwide, international, in
fact, recognized guy in the field of elementary
education.
Uh, to accept this research fellowship. To start
doing a. Start developing a procedure for the. Uh,
for a school district wide evaluation program. Up
to that time, only the high schools were evaluated
for Southern Association purposes and other
purposes. The elementary schools weren't into
the act.
So it was an opportunity to have the support from
that fellowship along with my remaining GI Bill
eligibility.
And I accepted that fellowship, married Julia
Hank, and by this time, Mary Catherine, who was
born that year in 48. We moved to Austin, lived in
the Bracken Ridge Apartments out near Lake
Austin,
a veteran's village. And it was there that I
finished my doctoral program. During the course
of that time, there was in the Texas legislature a
momentous piece of legislation for Texas public
education entitled the Gilmer-Akin
legislation. And it revised the entire system of
financing public education in Texas and revised
the governance of public education in Texas from
the state level. It did place a heavy. The
legislation did place a heavy commitment to local
control. Education.
I was asked to.
to work with a nucleus group before Governor
Buford Jester of Corsicana, before Governor
Jester signed the Gilmer-Akin legislation in
June the 9th of 49. I was, a couple of weeks before
that time, five of us. Read the legislation and
began developing the processes and procedures,
the forms, the applications, the rules and regs by
which the Gilmer education Gilmer Aiken
education would become operative.
After that experience, Doctor Edgar was selected
as Commissioner of Education.
So he inherited me for the second time. I was
already band director when he became
superintendent in Orange, and then this time in
Austin.
I went to work for the state education agency when
it was organized, the new education agency, and
stayed there until 55.
Had a call from W.B. Butler,
chairman of the board of trustees for the Orange
School District. Bill Butler was O.D. Butler's
brother.
Asked me to come down and interview the board
regarding the superintendency in Orange. I went
down.
had the interview and was offered the position and
accepted it. Before I went down, while still in
Austin, I had a call from Mr. Stark. And he said,
Frank, I know that you either have been or will be
offered the superintendency in Archer. I just
want to invite you to accept it. We'd like to have
you back down here.
I expect with his nomination and the support of the
board, I became superintendent there in, I think
in January of 55. Stayed until 59 when I had a call
from Earl Rudder, vice president of A&M College of
Texas. He invited me to come to College Station.
Visit with him. Tom Harrington. Then the
president of the system. And the University. And
meet with the board. With the view in mind of
becoming the Dean of the School of Arts and
Sciences. At the Agricultural and Mechanical
College of Texas. Mary Julia and I drove up for the
interview,
spent the day. I was interviewed by President
Rudder, by Vice President Rudder.
This was in May, incidentally, of 59.
Vice President Rudder, Tom Harrington, the
president,
Boyd, the
vice president for academic affairs. The name
escapes me, I'll pick it up later.
And then at 2 o'clock that afternoon, met with a
board of directors.
Sterling Evans presided as chairman. Other
members whom I recall are S.M. Wittenberg of
Amarillo,
the Fort Worth guy. Maggie McGee? No.
I'll pick this one up later also.
In these conversations, interviews, what did you
perceive they thought they were looking for? What
did they think they needed? Well, that really
wasn't revealed as clearly as I
came to learn a few weeks later.
It was apparent that they wanted someone from the
public education sector. Why, I wasn't certain. I
didn't know why, but it was clear that they did.
During the interview, they asked me numerous
questions regarding the transition of students,
male students, from the high school period to the
universities of our state.
And what happened to them? What prompted them in
their selection of a university?
It was at this time, incidentally, that A&M was at
a at a plateau in terms of its enrollment. Fewer
than 7,000, all male, all military.
They did not ask me any questions regarding
military or coeducation. They did ask me some
questions about my experience as a member of the
Committee of 75 at the University of Texas. That
committee had been appointed by the Board of
Regents at the University of Texas, 75 persons
from Texas and elsewhere, to make
recommendations to the Board of Regents there
regarding the nature of the university
on its 75th anniversary about 10 or 12 years down
the road.
I didn't know it, but at that time Texas A&M was
considering a similar study. And I think it was my
experience on that committee of 75, which they
picked up from my curriculum vitae, that they
asked me questions about that procedure. You're
inferring that your connection with the
University of Texas was in no way a disadvantage.
No. In no way. In fact, it was an advantage. My
experience with the Committee of 75 was
definitely an advantage. Because later on, after
I came on board at A&M, President Rutter asked me to
chair the Coordinating Committee for the Century
Council.
More about that later, I expect.
uh went back to orange married julie and i told our
son hank we got there just before curtain of the
senior play hank was a senior told him that we were
moving to a m he says well good for you i'm moving to
rice he had just gotten noticed that day that he had
been accepted at rice Okay, so we made the move to
College Station. Let me ask a trivia question.
This is the last time we'll talk money. What was the
beginning salary offer? I think, Haskell, the
beginning salary offered by A&M was $13,200.
I took a $600 cut to make the move and orange my
salary. Would have been beginning in the 59 year.
13 eight had you and Mrs Hubert known the rudders
when y'all were in Austin and they were in Austin. I
think I had met Margaret. We did. We did not know Mr
Rudder. I knew that he was land Commissioner.
I had seen him before. in the elevator of the state
office building at the corner of 12th
and Brazos streets. That building was shared by
the Texas Education Agency staff and the Land
Commission of Texas. And I think I rode the
elevator a couple of times with him. Was it clear in
the interview that he was going to have the title
president very soon? No. Oh. Not at all.
I accepted the position. And. Began. Reported for
work July 1st of 59. Let's see,
describe describe your perception. Of the
institution at in those early months. Well, let me
say this, Haskell, first. When it was announced
that Hubert was coming to A&M College as dean of the
College of Arts and Sciences,
there were some voices among the faculty of Arts
and Sciences that were dismayed by that
selection. And I can understand that. Here's a guy
out of public education, no previous experience
in higher education except through his
responsibilities at the Texas Education Agency,
coming in as dean of one of the four colleges at that
time, one of the four colleges in A&M. and there was
there was some dismay and consternation over that
appointment
but i must say that to the credit of the faculty they
were patient and tolerant and took a wait-and-see
attitude and i think by the end of the first year
there was a good relationship between the dean's
office, the heads of the departments, and the
general faculty in the School of Arts and
Sciences. I think that existed.
I had had the good experience in the Texas
Education Agency of being the director of the
division which had all of the state agency
responsibilities with colleges and
universities engaged in teacher education. And
that was every one of them. And in fact, I had
chaired an evaluation committee, which
Dr. Edgar had established
growing out of the legislation. to approve the
teacher education programs, not accredit them,
but to approve them
for teacher certification purposes and for
degree purposes, because at that time, the salary
schedule was attached to the degree one held and
the year's experience of teaching. I had the good
fortune of knowing 95%
of the presidents of colleges and universities in
Texas, senior colleges and universities in
Texas, many on a first-name basis, simply by
virtue of the experience of having been on their
campus for three days to a week chairing an
evaluation team, and in their office practically
every day during that period of time. That was a
rich set of experiences for me to take with me in
this job. And knowing the presidents, I also knew
the principal academic officers of the
institutions.
During my interview at A&M
with Boyd Page,
I asked Dr. Page, I said, it's
most unusual for a university to go to a secondary
school program and select a superintendent of
schools to be an academic dean, especially in the
field of arts and sciences. Does President Rutter
know? No. Not President Rudder. Does Mr. Rudder
and Harrington and the board know what the
consequences might be? Have they considered that
aspect of this appointment? Page grinned and
chuckled, and he said, yes,
I think they've weighed at some, but they're
willing to take the risk if they get the right
person. I didn't know what the right person meant.
But nonetheless, I raised that question and got
that response.
Well, I'm at A&M. I'm the dean of the School of Arts
and Sciences. And let's see. I learned at about
this time, early after arriving at A&M, I learned
that then President Rutter, after I arrived there
July 1 as dean, on that same date, Vice President
Rutter was named president of the university.
Now, I learned that President Rutter had called
J.W. Edgar. Those two had known each other
principally, I think, because of having shared
the same office building in Austin over a period of
a few years.
President Lutter called Commissioner Edgar and
said, J.W.,
I need to bring somebody to Texas A&M who is
knowledgeable about the Texas public school
system and particularly the high schools of
Texas. We here at A&M need to improve our
relationship with the secondary school sector.
Will you give me some names of people who might be
prospective candidates for such a job? And he
said, I think, he said, the position I have open at
this time is the dean's job in the School of Arts and
Sciences.
Excuse all of this coughing, clearing of one's
throat.
Dr. Edgar gave President Rutter two names. One was
Bascom B. Hayes, H-A-Y-E-S,
with whom I had worked very closely in the State
Education Agency and who was a close friend. He and
his wife Donnie and Mary Julia and I
spent many evenings together, a dear close
friend. He nominated Bascom Hayes, who at that
time, I believe, was superintendent of schools in
Freeport.
And he
nominated me. I was then superintendent of
schools in Orange.
I think one of the reasons I was invited to be
interviewed first was a degree. I had a PhD degree.
Bascom Hayes had an Ed D degree. In fact, when I
decided to go back to the University and. After WW2
and pursue graduate education. I committed
myself to a PhD track because I knew at some time if I
had an opportunity to go into higher education, it
would be much more valuable than an EdD.
Dr. Edgar recommended those two names. I was
invited first to be interviewed, and on the same
day of that interview was offered the position.
And so that was the basis for my becoming
a candidate for the position at A&M. And that's a
sketchy
history of my before-A&M days, Haskell. You got
here. in the summer of 59 what was your perception
of the institution in those early weeks and months
well first let's let's talk early weeks oh okay did
you lie the first summer session i don't know what
the enrollment in summer session was in in 59, but
my first impression of A&M was there's nobody
here. I could walk across the campus and not see a
single individual. Where are they?
That was a strange
occurrence to me.
I came to realize that, number one, summer session
enrollment at A&M was a downturn enrollment, and
two, I had already known that the general
enrollment at A&M had been slow to change, and
that became the basis for my
concern about the all-male, all-military
phenomena.
Over the long range, my perception of the
university
as an all male, all military institution, was
one of working within that framework and trying to
do the best I could within
that environment. I recall my first experience at
registration time in the fall of 59. In those days,
registration for the entire university student
body was accomplished in one day. One
day. All of the departments and colleges went to
Sabisa Hall where tables were arranged. by
departments by colleges all around the hall
students were first admitted by the registrar's
office and then then they came into the hall to make
out their their schedule of courses and we made
every student's schedule during that one day of
registration time and that was it there was a
course added additional time for ads and drops
later on. But registration was accomplished in
one day. I thought that was amazing. There were
long lines. But they became shorter and shorter.
But the thing that was impressive to me was that the
College of Arts and Science. The school of Arts and
Sciences faculty.
they were running
uh each a member from each table would be running
around what's the enrollment going to be what does
it look like this year can you tell any difference
are we going to make 7 000
well it was uh i think a great disappointment when
when they didn't make seven thousand that seemed
to be a goal out there somewhere And, of course, at
this same time, Mrs. Post, WWII, and the other
colleges and universities in the state were
skyrocketing enrollment, just going high.
Well, that was it. Early on, I was introduced by
President Rutter as the new dean to a group of
former students who were meeting at the msc i think
there was a group of about 20 24 i don't know what
unit it was from the former students but president
rudder asked me to come over and be introduced to
them as the new dean in the school of arts and
sciences I did and
they asked me to make a few comments.
And
I, without any temerity what so all, I said to the
group, incidentally when I entered the room It was
a. Coffee break period and all of the talk was.
Football.
Small groups here and here and here football.
Well, with no temerity at all, I I suggested in a
very pleasant. I think diplomatic and tactful
way. Let. I had come to Texas A&M to accept this
position because of my strong belief in a good,
sound academic program at a major university. I
said, I think the potential is here, albeit I've
been here such a short time, the potential is here
for great improvement in that direction. I would
hope that the former students would turn their
attention to a concern for the for the academic
development and improvement at the university. I
didn't say give it as much attention as you do
athletics. I didn't even mention the word. But I
did put in a plug for the academic side of the house
for quality faculty.
What was their reaction? That was it. The reaction
was favorable, really favorable. I think I saw a
few startled faces when I made this opening, but
I do think that the reaction was very favorable.
President Rutter didn't comment on my remarks,
but I didn't expect him to. At any rate, that was my
first introduction to a former student group.
And my perception was that
That the general tenor,
the general feeling in the School of Arts and
Sciences principally among the faculty was that
we are basically a service institution.
agricultural and mechanical college is not
likely to open up for the arts, humanities,
and except as it's important to engineering, the
sciences. Incidentally, let me tell this story
about one of our department heads in the College
of, in the School of Arts and Sciences. I learned
during my first year here that Chester Klippel,
head of the mathematics department, they're so a
great guy, kind.
I learned that when the College of Engineering
would put into their degree program an advanced
course in some engineering class that required a
heavy support of mathematics, he would go
audition that course for the entire semester. Sit
in the classroom. with the students to find out
just what kind of mathematics that course
required. And if it required an adjustment to the
curriculum in the Department of Mathematics,
he'd go back and make that adjustment. I thought
that was fantastic from the standpoint of taking
the responsibility of providing service courses
seriously. In my, I wished I had located a copy of
it, but I haven't. I'm talking about a copy of my
first meeting, a copy of my speech comments to the
faculty in the School of Arts and Sciences at my
first meeting with them. I think it was in October
of 59.
I was very apprehensive before that meeting. I
didn't really know what to expect.
I had a prepared speech. I've got a copy of it
somewhere. I want to find it. But during that
speech, I did make the point with some emphasis.
that the School of Arts and Sciences
had two basic missions,
the lesser of which was the service course
situation. But I think I emphasize also that we
needed to take that responsibility seriously.
And
to say that good engineers needed good science and
good English and good communication skills and so
forth.
But then also that each one of the disciplines
within the college
had a right to prime time, mainly because of its
disciplinary nature and the field of knowledge
which it represented. Without that knowledge,
the campus would be incomplete.
And
my perception was that the faculty really had
been, I don't know how to, had been
underappreciated
for
so long.
that they
felt that way, Haskell. I don't know whether
that's accurate or not, but it occurred to me that
among some quarters that happened.
When you completed your remarks, how did you feel
about your success in getting the message across?
I felt okay about it. Because I was with a small
group, we walked not too far behind you as you
walked back to the Nagel Hall office, and we
thought that you felt you had gotten across the
message you wanted to. We were giving you a high
mark. Well,
I remember C-squared Doak. came up to me after the
meeting dr duke was head of the department of
biology
he came up to the to me after the meeting and he says
something
like this uh
i feel we're fortunate to have You as our new dean,
you have shown intelligence and tact and I'm eager
to work with you.